---
layout: single
categories: 
    - Database
author: Yue Yin

toc: true
toc_sticky: true
---


## Overview

Because SQL is declarative, the query only tells the DBMS what to compute, but not how to compute it. The DBMS needs to translate the query into an executable query plan. The job of the DBMS's optimizer is to pick an optimial plan for a given query.

There are two types of optimization strategies: (1) heuristics: match query to known patterns. This approach may require consulting the system catalog, but never need to examine the data itself; (2) cost estimation: read the data and estimate the cost of executing equivalent plans. Pick the one with the lowest cost.



## Logical Plan and Physical Plan

The optimizer generates a mapping from a *logical algebra expression* to the optimal equivalent *physical algebra expression*. The logical plan is roughly equivalent to the relational algebra expression in the query. *Physical operators* define a specific execution strategy using an access path for the different operators in the query plan. There does not always exists a one-to-one mapping from logical to physical plan.

Many query optimization relies on relational algebra equivalence. 



## Cost Estimations

The cost of a query plan depends on CPU, disk I/O, memory, network, etc. Exhaustive enumeration of all possible plans for a query is too expensive. To approximate the cost, DBMS's maintain internal statistics about tables, attributes, and indexes in the system catalog.

For each relation $ R $, the DBMS maintains:

- $ N_R $: the number of tuples in $ R $
- $ V(A, R) $: the number of distinct values of attribute $ A $

Techniques include: histogram, sampling.



## Plan enumeration

For single-query query plans, the hardest task is to choose the best access methods. Normally heuristics rules are used.

For multi-relation query plans, the number of alternative plans grows rapidly as the number of joins increases. IBM System R only consider left-deep join trees, as they are better suited for the iterator model - the DBMS does not need to materialize the outputs of the join operators. 

To make query plans, the DBMS must enumerate the orderings, then the plans for each operator, then the access methods for each table. Dynamci programming can be used.



