---
layout: single
categories: 
    - OS
author: Yue Yin

toc: true
toc_sticky: true
---

## Background

`Futex` has been mentioned many times when I was studying OS, database latches, and Go primitives. I was told it is more efficient than `mutex`, but no one explains why. This post try to explain the basic mechanisms of `futex`. 

## Test-and-set, Compare-and-swap, and Spin Locks

[This note](https://www.cs.cornell.edu/courses/cs4410/2015su/lectures/lec06-spin.html) explains everything. Short summary:
- The test-and-set instruction (TAS) sets the contents of a given address to one, and returns the previous value.
- The compare-and-swap (CAS) atomically compares the contents of a memory location to a given value and, **only if they are the same**, modifies the contents of that memory location to a given new value.
- The process of continually monitoring a variable to wait for it to change is referred to as *spinning*; locks that are implemented using atomic operations (both TAS and CAS) are called *spin locks*.

## Implement Mutex

### With Spin Locks?

You can implement a mutex using spin locks in the user space, but this is obviously inefficient - you are burning CPU cycles wastefully.

### With Help from OS?

Mutex provides access control by making system calls to enter the kernel space. The kernel maintains waiting queues for each mutex and sleeps/wakes up threads when appropriate.

This avoids the problem of burninig cycles in spin locks. However, context switch between kernel mode and user mode is expensive. Can we avoid this, at least to some extent?

## How futex works

The concept of futex is based on a simple observation: when there's little contention, the thread usually succeeds in acquiring the mutex. In this case, the context switches for locking/unlocking looks very wasteful, as the kernel plays no role in the process. 

The futex is comprised of (1) a spin latch in the user-space and (2) a OS-level mutex. If the thread can acquire the user-space latch, then the latch is set without entering the kernel mode. If the thread cannot acquire the user-space latch (the atomic operation returns error since the latch is acquired by some other thread), it enters the kernel mode to be put to sleep, and to be waken up later. The kernel maintains waiting queues internally (with hashtable, as you can imagine).

Note: this is an extremely simplified description of how futex works. Details are ommitted, but the idea is corrct.

## Conclusion

Futex uses user-space atomic operations if possible. Otherwise, it falls back to the OS mutex.

It saves the cost of context switch between user mode and kernel mode when there's little contention. 



## Reference

https://stackoverflow.com/a/3659535/9057530

https://www.cs.cornell.edu/courses/cs4410/2015su/lectures/lec06-spin.html

https://sudonull.com/post/13140-Futex-basics




